>> So Jodi, tell me
about the sixth step.
>> The sixth step is hormones,
and one of the most important
things that we need to know
about hormones is that they
never go out on their own.
So a lot of people come
to me, and they say,
my hormones are out of balance.
I need them balanced.
What can we do about it?
And they expect to
be given a cream,
and they expect to be given
herbs to balance them back up.
But what I've found is
that if you try and treat
hormones without finding out
why they're out of balance,
whatever you give them
might last for two weeks,
and then they're out
of balance again.
And it just won't sustain.
Hormones are actually
affected by everything,
so your hormones are--
if we go back through
all of the other steps,
allergies will throw
out your hormones,
because allergies actually
make you retain fluid.
And that fluid retention
has an instant impact
on causing a hormonal imbalance.
Your bacteria amplifies
hormonal problems.
Your nutrients are required
to make your hormones.
Your diet is very important
in controlling insulin
and glucagon, which
are dietary hormones.
And they will impact all
of your other hormones.
And then you've got stress,
which produces too much
cortisol, if you're
very stressed,
and affects your DHEA levels.
And what that does is then
impact how much of your other
hormones that you can produce,
as a lot of your hormones--
your testosterone
and your estrogen--
is produced by your
DHEA, so if you're
declining in DHEA because
of long term adrenal
insufficiency, you will
decline in those other hormones
as well.
So you can get mood disturbances
from a ratio difference
between estrogen
and progesterone,
which is women
with PMS symptoms.
You can get--
>> So they need to get rid
of estrogen and increase
the progesterone.
>> Yes, that's right, and
progesterone can be quite
difficult to increase, if you're
eating foods you're allergic
to-- for instance, if
you're very stressed,
because both of those
things drop your thyroid,
and your thyroid has a role
in helping with progesterone
production.
Same as dopamine has a role
in progesterone production.
So all of these initial
steps we talked about
are all very, very important in
making your hormones balanced.
So in most cases, what
I find is once I've
been through the first
five steps with people,
their hormones are
almost optimum.
And then what we do is have
a look at what's remaining,
and there might be
imbalances caused
by a lifetime of imbalances,
where the body will then
need encouragement to
balance those hormones again.
And that might mean
using certain herbs
to help raise your progesterone
levels or certain nutrients
that are required to make
those, using certain nutrients
to clear estrogen out
through your liver.
Your liver has a major
role in estrogen clearance,
and when that's not
doing its job properly,
you find that estrogen
can be too high.
And that will change the
ratio between estrogen
and progesterone as well,
not to mention leading
to other diseases,
like estrogen dominance
has been linked to cancers and
all sorts of other problems.
>> Sure.
So tell me practical steps
for increasing progesterone
and decreasing estrogen. Are
you into topical progesterone,
or are you into
supplementing DHEA,
or what sort of supplements
do you recommend?
What's your general approach?
>> What I find is once we're at
a situation where everything is
being done to
remove the problems,
the most common problem you
find is low progesterone.
And as I said, your thyroid
is responsible for helping
that production.
Now your thyroid will
decline or drop in function
when you eat foods
you're allergic to
or when you are very stressed.
So you want to make sure
you are using everything
you can, such as iodide
and selenium and nutrients,
to make your thyroid
work at its best.
And that will help your
progesterone production
as well.
But dopamine is also reliant--
progesterone is also
reliant on dopamine,
so making sure you're
getting your vitamin
C and your nutrients
that help you
make that dopamine production
and balancing your lifestyle,
you know, using those stress
controls like yoga and all
of those things we
talked about before
and making sure that you
can balance your life
to help with the progesterone.
There are different
herbs that you can use.
There are progesteronic herbs.
You know, people have heard
of Chaste Tree and Dong Quai
and a few of these other
herbs that you can use,
but you really
should be finding out
exactly what your
problem is, because there
can be a multitude of
different imbalances or levels
that can cause all
the same symptoms,
and you need to know
what it is for you.
So estrogen dominance,
for instance-- as I said,
we support the liver
by clearing that out so
that we have an ability to use
that estrogen that we have,
and then get rid of it.
But we want to also be
able to make sure we're
making enough estrogen as well.
Now your estrogen
and your progesterone
and all of these
hormones are also
made through your
adrenal glands,
not only through your
tissues and your ovaries.
So-- and with men with
their testes also.
So producing
testosterone can also
be produced through
the adrenal gland.
So this is why stress is
a very important factor.
We need to make sure that our
adrenal glands are functioning
very well so that as our sex
hormones decline with age,
our adrenal glands can take
over and do the job for us.
So to be able to make
all of those also
then relies on stress
management techniques
and toning your adrenal glands.
When it comes to DHEA, if
someone is declined enough
that they're not making it at
all or incredibly low levels,
you can supplement with DHEA
until you repair the system.
But I don't believe
in giving hormones
externally in the
majority of cases,
unless you're also giving
herbs to encourage the body
to make it themselves.
So there are certain herbs, such
as your adrenal adaptogen type
herbs, that will encourage your
adrenal glands to be working
better, and they will
help improve your ability
to make those hormones again.
But they can take
quite a while to do.
And in the meantime,
for someone who's
bed-bound because of
chronic fatigue syndrome,
because of low DHEA, they may
require that supplementation
for that period of time.
>> Sure, understood.
But your general premise
is start at the beginning.
>> Absolutely.
>> Start with the allergies.
Start with the
backed up bacteria.
Start with the nutrients.
Start with the diet.
Start with the stress.
And then look at all those.
>> I don't believe that there is
any reason to give a supplement
for anything.
If you continue to put
the problem into the body,
all you're doing is
band-aiding, and that
should never be the goal.
You need to always look at
removing the causes first,
then replenishing all of the
nutrients required to do it
yourself so that when your
body is doing it yourself,
all you then need to rely on
is your own diet and lifestyle.
You know, if you ask anyone to
stay on supplements for life,
they are going to look at
you and think you're crazy.
You know, it's not
something we want to do,
but when you have a problem that
is so vast in your body, where
it's filtered through
all different systems,
because it's been
going on too long,
you don't really have
much of a choice.
But to spend that period of
time recovering with support,
and that support may
come from supplements.
It may come from herbs.
It may come from
changing your diet.
It may come from controlling
those gut bacteria.
Whatever you need to do
to correct your situation,
and then when you're in that
state of maintenance, you go on
and you control it
with a great lifestyle.
>> Great.
So I met a medical
doctor once in the US,
and he was a very high level
integrative practitioner.
He said, anytime you
use a drug or anytime
you use a supplement,
you should treat it
like a crutch, when
you have a broken leg.
>> Absolutely.
>> You're on a crutch for a
period of time, until it heals,
and then you come off it,
and your body will progress
naturally.
>> Yes, that's
right, and you know,
I've seen patients who've
been on supplements for life.
They've been naturopath
shopping or doctor shopping,
and they just keep going to
new practitioners all the time.
And the cause was
never found for them.
I think the most
important thing that you
can do for any
person or any patient
is to investigate their health.
Get the diagnosis right.
The diagnosis is the answer.
If you get that right, you
can target their problem,
and the rest will
start to improve.
If you get the
diagnosis wrong, they're
reliant on symptomatic
treatment alone.
>> Sure.
>> That never
changes their life.
They are reliant on it for
life, and they never get well.
>> And it's the same philosophy
as the conventional medical
paradigm, which is relying on
symptomatic treatment only.
>> Yeah, that's right.